createSharedState (#130)
reactjs/rfcs: text/0000-create-shared-state.md

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/3163392/68551190-7fe32c80-040a-11ea-935c-e390f1121a24.png)

## Side-by-side comparison with Context API
![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/3163392/68534701-aedc9e00-0337-11ea-89c3-7eed540f23cd.png)

# Basic example

I suggest having an API such as this:

```jsx
import { createSharedState } from 'react';

const useTheme = createSharedState('light');

function App {
  return (
    <Toolbar />
    <ThemeSwitch />
  );
}

function Toolbar() {
  return (
    <div>
      <ThemedButton />
    </div>
  );
}

function ThemedButton() {
  const [theme] = useTheme();

  return <Button theme={theme} />;
}

function ThemeSwitch {
  const [theme, setTheme] = useTheme();

  return (
    <Button
      onClick={() => setTheme(theme === 'dark' ? 'light' : 'dark')}
    >
      {theme}
    </Button>
  );
}
```

For full working example please check https://codesandbox.io/s/react-create-shared-state-demo-9s9ui.

# Motivation

> `createSharedState` results with a cleaner codebase with easily reusable shared state. Using this function will eliminated not necessary re-renders caused by top-level `Provider` in case of syncing data between nested components on different branches of component tree.

Reviewer: If I understand your statement correctly, I think it is inaccurate. Just because a higher-level component re-renders does not mean that all its children will necessarily re-render. https://kentcdodds.com/blog/optimize-react-re-renders

Author: You can optimize for sure but without any manual intervention everything below provider will be rerendered.

Reviewer 2: @mucsi96, wheh a Provider changes value, children are not re-rendered, unless they are subscribed to the same context.
Demo: https://codesandbox.io/s/pedantic-moore-cxfq5

In React community many projects are already created with very similar idea:
- https://github.com/pie6k/hooksy
- https://github.com/kelp404/react-hooks-shared-state
- https://github.com/philippguertler/react-hook-shared-state
- https://github.com/dimapaloskin/react-shared-hooks
- https://github.com/atlassian/react-sweet-state
- https://github.com/paul-phan/global-state-hook
- https://github.com/donavon/use-persisted-state

Even though the solution can be easily created in user-land my motivation is the following to add it to core API:
- Most of developers would not know about it's existence if it's not mentioned in React documentation. Usually training sessions, blogs post about React are based on that React core API documentation and tutorial
- The code is very small and simple. It will not increase the bundle size much

# Detailed design

The design could be very simple. This is naive implementation based on public React API.

```jsx
import { useState, useEffect } from 'react';

> export function createSharedState(defaultValue) {
>   const listeners = new Set();
>   let backupValue = defaultValue;
> 
>   return () => {
>     const [value, setValue] = useState(backupValue);
> 
>     useEffect(() => {
>       listeners.add(setValue);
>       return () => listeners.delete(setValue);
>     }, []);
> 
>     useEffect(() => {
>       backupValue = value;
>       listeners.forEach(listener => listener !== setValue && listener(value));
>     }, [value]);
> 
>     return [value, setValue];
>   };
> }

Reviewer 3: I've done this in an internal project at work, and I highlight recommend doing these changes:
- Keep the setter separate, it allows you use to use it:
  - for setup, outside components.
  - in class components.
  - in function component without "hooking" onto the state, so if you only use the setter, it won't trigger a rerender for that component on state changes.
  - in tests, to reset the state for example.
- Update the state immediately in the `useEffect`, as it might have been updated after the render, and before the effect call.

```suggestion
export function createSharedState(initialState) {
  const listeners = new Set();
  let sharedState = initialState;
  
  function useSharedState() {
    const [state, setState] = useState(sharedState);

    useEffect(() => {
      listeners.add(setState);
      setState(sharedState);

      return () => {
        listeners.delete(setState);
      };
    }, []);

    return state;
  }

  function setSharedState(newState) {
    if (typeof newState === 'function') {
      newState = newState(sharedState);
    }
    if (!Object.is(sharedState, newState)) {
      sharedState = newState;
      for (const listener of listeners) {
        listener(sharedState);
      }
    }
  }

  return [useSharedState, setSharedState];
}
```

```

For more details please check the [`react-create-shared-state`](https://github.com/mucsi96/react-create-shared-state) NPM package. 

# Drawbacks

> As with any React hooks this works only in functional components. 

Reviewer: This would create a singleton which has the drawback of not working very well in SSR environments. I think that's a ship stopper personally.

Author: I expect in SSR environment the initial value to be rendered. Can you explain please what is the issue with SSR environments?
